JUDY WOODRUFF: When it comes
to Wall Street, many people
think of money and greed, but
a professor at Harvard Business
School argues there's a lot
more to the world of finance,
and he uses books and
movies to make his case.
Our economics correspondent
Paul Solman has the story.
It's part of our series
Making Sense, which
airs every Thursday.
ACTORS: One, two, three!
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
PAUL SOLMAN: The field
of finance, you might say
it has an image problem.
Consider "The Wolf of
Wall Street," based on
a real-life character.
LEONARDO DICAPRIO, Actor:
If anybody here thinks I'm
superficial or materialistic, go
get a job at McDonald's,
because that's where you
(EXPLETIVE DELETED) belong.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
PAUL SOLMAN: Investment banker
Patrick Bateman in "American
Psycho" is fictional, but not
entirely implausible.
CHRISTIAN BALE, Actor: I
have all the characteristics
of a human being, flesh,
blood, skin, hair,
but not a single clear,
identifiable emotion, except
for greed and disgust.
MICHAEL DOUGLAS, Actor: I am
not a destroyer of companies.
PAUL SOLMAN: Hey, finance has
had an image problem since
buyout bro Gordon Gekko graced
the silver screen 30 years ago.
MICHAEL DOUGLAS: The point
is, ladies and gentlemen that
greed, for lack of a better
word, is good.
ACTOR: Big bank, small
bank, I like to make money.
All right?
PAUL SOLMAN: And the real
events of the 2008 financial
crisis only made matters worse.
ACTOR: That's America's
housing market.
PAUL SOLMAN: But Harvard
Business School's Mihir
Desai says there are
two faces to finance,
though he readily acknowledges
the dark one to his students.
ÑMD+ITÑÑMD-ITÑ MIHIR DESAI,
Harvard Business School: Many
people demonize what you do,
and it's hard to live that way.
PAUL SOLMAN: And he
told me he gets why that
perception is so pervasive.
MIHIR DESAI: When you have
real-life figures like Martin
Shkreli, who was both a hedge
fund trader and then took over
a pharmaceutical company, jacked
up prices by 5000 percent,
subsequently engaged in
a variety of nefarious
behavior, and very
proudly so, so it almost
makes you feel like real
life is outpacing fiction.
PAUL SOLMAN: Desai has
written a book to try
to balance the picture,
"The Wisdom of Finance."
MIHIR DESAI: The goal in the
book is to try to demystify
finance so that the people who
currently demonize it will
come to understand it, as
opposed to simply oppose it.
And then for the people
who are in finance, we have
to get back to the ideas.
The ideas matter.
PAUL SOLMAN: To Professor
Desai, the big idea of finance
is illustrated by the Quincunx
machine in Boston's Museum of
Science: the ability to find
order in a seemingly random,
and therefore
risk-forsaken, world.
MIHIR DESAI: This was a real
revolution in probability,
which is random things happening
results in predictable patterns.
PAUL SOLMAN: Balls drop,
bounce randomly left or
right as they encounter
the pins, and eventually
hit bottom to form
a bell-shaped curve.
MIHIR DESAI: Things that seem
random actually end up resulting
in a very orderly pattern,
in fact, this bell-shaped
distribution or
normal distribution.
And that, of course, is the
foundation of finance, because
you observe a lot of random
things, but it ends up
behaving in predictable ways.
PAUL SOLMAN: Randomness and
its risks are everywhere.
Finance's job, to
try to manage them.
Case in point?
The income plight of women
throughout most of history.
ACTOR: You should consider
that it is by no means certain
that another offer of marriage
may ever be made to you.
MIHIR DESAI: Mr. Collins, who
delivers the worst proposal
ever to Lizzy Bennet in "Pride
and Prejudice."
ACTOR: I am well aware that
1,000 pounds is all you may
ever be entitled to, but rest
assured I shall never
reproach on that score
when we are married.
MIHIR DESAI: You're not that
wealthy, you're not that
pretty, you have an offer on the
table today from me.
You would better take it.
PAUL SOLMAN: It's the great
economic risk faced by all
Jane Austen's Bennet girls, but
says Desai:
MIHIR DESAI: Lizzy turns down
Mr. Collins, and the advice
of her mother, because she
wants to roll the dice again.
Of course, that ends up
very nicely, ultimately,
with Mr. Darcy, but,
at the time, she didn't
know.
PAUL SOLMAN: No, Lizzy was
lucky in love and money.
She accepted the risk.
But most others didn't.
MIHIR DESAI: The next day,
he gives the same proposal to
Charlotte, her friend, and she
takes it.
ACTOR: Cousin Elizabeth,
you can see before you
the happiest of men.
PAUL SOLMAN: Charlotte
Lucas' lot wasn't the
happiest, but better than
penury, one imagines.
MIHIR DESAI: She said, I'm just
going to take the solution.
PAUL SOLMAN: In Anthony
Trollope "Phineas Finn":
ACTOR: How nice to find
you and to find you alone.
PAUL SOLMAN: Violet Effingham
had a very different
problem: too many suitors.
ACTRESS: And you
look very piratical
tonight, Lord Chiltern.
ACTOR: That is because you see
me by the side of all these
smug, glossy parliament men.
MIHIR DESAI: She doesn't know
who to choose, and she says,
you know, if only I could marry
all 10.
You know, she's the
essence of diversification.
PAUL SOLMAN: Because then
you wouldn't have all
your eggs in one basket.
You would have 10 different
guys, 10 different fortunes.
MIHIR DESAI: Exactly.
The intuition that you
can lower risk by dividing
resources is extremely old.
That diversification idea goes
back to shipping, when you split
up your cargo across routes.
It goes back to agriculture,
when people would
split up their land.
In Ecclesiastes, we see
the advice to invest in
seven ventures -- no,
eight ventures, because
you never know what
disaster will happen.
PAUL SOLMAN: So this is
the benign face of finance.
It allows you to protect against
risk by, among other things,
diversifying your investments.
But then there's
the dark face again.
When you invest, you're still
stuck with the risk of giving
your money to someone else.
MIHIR DESAI: I gave my
money to Tim Cook, who runs
Apple, and I own one share.
Here's the problem.
I can't watch Tim Cook.
So the underlying problem
becomes, well, wait a second,
how do I monitor that guy?
How do I watch that guy?
How do I make sure he's
doing the right thing for me?
PAUL SOLMAN: This is the
principal-agent problem.
The principal is the
shareholder, who has the wealth.
The agent is the manager
entrusted with it.
ACTOR: If you only know
what I went through for you.
PAUL SOLMAN: And principals
and agents can have conflicting
interests, in the case of
"The Producers,"
extremely conflicting.
GENE WILDER, Actor:
It's absolutely amazing
that, under the right
circumstances, a producer
could make more money with a
flop than he could with a hit.
MIHIR DESAI: The essence of "The
Producers" is that these two
folks, Bialystock and Bloom,
want to rip off a bunch of
investors, and by creating a
flop, the investors won't want
their money back.
They raised 25000 percent
of what they actually need.
They create this -- what they
think is going to be a flop,
"Springtime For Hitler," and,
of course, it becomes a
hit, and they go to jail.
These investors trusted
Bialystock and Bloom.
They couldn't
actually monitor them.
They turned out to be bad eggs.
That is the problem
with capital markets.
That is the problem with me
giving money to people and not
knowing what they end up doing.
PAUL SOLMAN: But, of course,
for every Bialystock,
there's a Buffett, for
every Bernie Madoff,
1,000 honest brokers,
because there have always
been two faces of finance.
MIHIR DESAI: This is actually
my favorite book about finance.
It's from 1688.
PAUL SOLMAN: Yes, a
good year for finance.
MIHIR DESAI: And it was
"Confusion de Confusiones."
He basically describes finance
as the most noble profession,
as well as the most notorious
profession.
I think we have lost sense
of the nobility part that he
describes, and we tend to focus
on the negative.
PAUL SOLMAN: Desai, wanting
to accentuate the positive,
uses an exemplar of finance
from Willa Cather's 19th
century novel, "O Pioneers!"
MIHIR DESAI: Alexandra
Bergson is this wonderful
character who is a farmer,
who starts by basically
doing a leveraged buyout of
farms near where she lives.
PAUL SOLMAN: She borrows
money in order to buy.
MIHIR DESAI: She borrows
a bunch of money to
buy all of these farms.
ACTRESS: Now, I
have figured it out.
We sell most of the cattle e
and the corn we have left over.
We buy the Lindstrom place.
Then we take out two loans
on our half-section and
buy Peter Crow's place.
MIHIR DESAI: She ends up
engaging in transactions
that would be in any
finance textbook.
But she never loses
sight of who she is.
She never behaves in ways that
would suggest that she thinks
everything is due to her skill,
as opposed to luck.
She's very conscious of and
very humble of her outcome.
ACTOR: You have worked wonders
with this land, Alexandra.
ACTRESS: Oh, we hadn't any of
us much to do with it, Carl.
The land did it.
MIHIR DESAI: We really need good
stories about finance, because
good stories will guide good
behavior.
PAUL SOLMAN: It's a lesson Desai
tries to teach his students.
MIHIR DESAI: Pick your stories
carefully, because you will
live your life by these stories.
Some of you might
pick Gordon Gekko.
I don't recommend it.
Alexandra Bergson is
a fantastic model.
PAUL SOLMAN: For the
"PBS NewsHour," this is
economics correspondent
Paul Solman reporting
from Boston.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Who knew
by watching all these
films that you could get
great economic advice?
So, while writing his book,
Professor Desai says he was
surprised to discover how many
great writers, painters
and musicians also
held jobs in finance.
You can test your own knowledge
of these entrepreneurial
artists with our online
quiz at PBS.org/NewsHour.